"The essence, the ultimate meaning of Raphukhi is your love, devotion, joy, confidence, and
atrocity to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. That is the religion that is started from the
heart. Now in the Vedayana teaching, and this is not just the Vedayana making up these things,
but this is where things are. And we begin to explore the richness of the nature's meaning,
nature's richness. Then there is many different kind of like there that we advance deepening
or moving forward. In that context, then in the Vedayana teaching,
I can say, the object of refuge as outer object of refuge, inner object of refuge, and cigarette
object of refuge, and a very ultimate object of refuge. So there is about four different
levels that we can embarrassing of this meaning of refuge. Exchana refuge, taking refuge, is
the way to involve more kind of more dealing with world, with things are in the world, where
we can perceive that. And that is then always we call Buddha, Dharma, Sangha. So the Buddha
is one, and Dharma is second, and the Sangha is third. So then Buddha, Dharma, Sangha.
The inner technique of refuge, inner understanding of the refuge is then known as in the Vedayana
teaching, Guru, Deva, and Dakinis. And Guru as Buddha, deity or the Yadam as Dharma, and
Dakini as Sangha, which have refuge. Generally, again, what means Guru as Buddha? And Guru,
for example, generally, Gurba and Masambha, but also Guru means one way, the teacher.
Teacher which represents generally the Buddha, representing that. Whether they are qualified
or not, when you say the teacher, then is represented Buddha. Therefore, always in the
Vedayana teaching, and not just the Vedayana teaching, always a qualified teacher. That
is which is really important, qualified teacher. After this qualified teacher, truly that teacher
representing Buddha. So therefore, Guru as Buddha. And then, generally, always in the
Newma school subject, where Buddhism often said, no matter whatever Guru you have, or
the teacher you have, you can always see they are like as part of the Gurba and Masambha.
So we are utilizing through the closeness to the Gurba and Masambha. So under the Gurba
Gurba and Masambha, all the teachers there, and feel the Gurba and Masambha represent
all the teachers. That's what always in the teaching said. And not just in the Newma school,
but always in the, in generally in the Tibetan Buddhism said, in the, the Gurba and Masambha
is the teacher of the Tibetans, teacher of all the Tibetan Buddhists. That's what how
Gurba and Masambha came. And among all the deities, the Awalakti Shora is the deity of
the all the Tibetan practitioners, Tibetan Buddhists, always. This is how Karmagli connected.
And among all the nakinis, the Tara is then again, Karmagli connected to deities or nakinis
to the Tibetan practitioners that they often say that. So in that case, now, Gurba and
Masambha, which is the embodiment of all Buddhas. When we take rafu, rafu to the Buddha Dharma
Sangha externally is the Buddha Shaktamuni and all the dharmas. And then, then the Sanghas,
all different levels of Sanghas inwardly, then is Buddha Shaktamuni is no other than
Gurba and Masambha. So, Rafu in Gurba and Masambha, Gurba and Masambha. Then what the
next one is the yadams. So that is about the Guru and then about the yadam. Yadam is represented
in the Dharma. That means what is really Dharma? Dharma is this, of course, Sanskrit word, but
which means, if we translate that Dharma into English, it has meaning, meaning, correcting,
and protecting. Correcting and protecting. It's called Chhichyuki yondi nidhe dema in
the Tibetan. Yamodhana, that's the great master Vasubendu, who is one of the leading masters
in Sri Mahayana Buddhism or in Buddhism, and who wrote the famous text as Abhidharma, Abhidharma
teachings, or the conventional meaning of Abhidharma, Amidharma kosha, kosha, that's the quote.
And he said one of his teachings, what means the meaning of the Dharma? He is a nimudhana
mala chhiba, nimudhana mala chhiba, nimudhana mala chhiba, because it is protecting, correcting
us, correcting us from all the habit patterns of the emotions. And by that, it will protect
us from any wrong, wrong directions, wrong directions. Therefore, this is known as Dharma
teaching, teaching of the Dharma. So that means it has meaning of the correcting and protecting,
correcting from the habit pattern and negative emotions. By that, it is protecting to the
wrong directions of all the wrong realms and all the wrong directions, and always putting
up in the correct right directions of that is free from the habit patterns and free from
the negative emotions. That is the meaning of the Dharma. So Dharma, therefore, yidam
is what? Yidam, the intubated word means something that is heartly connected, heartly connected.
That means absolutely yidam is no other than our love, kindness, and compassion, and wisdom.
That is the really yidam. In this case, for example, yidam. The ultimate yidam is no other
than compassion. When you have the tremendous power of compassion, what it will do? What
it will protect? It will protect us from immediately from raging angers, raging self-importance.
Because of that, it will eliminate all the kind of publications of that, the publications
that are produced by these negativities of the anger, and then yellows, and so forth.
It will make our heart more soft, tender, tender, and that is what the really the compassion
is. That is yidam. This is yidam. Yidam is ultimately speaking, yidam is no other than
our practice, our teaching, our Dharma, something that connected to our heart. That is the meaning
of the yidam. Then the rakinis, the inner object of rafuji as a sangha, rakinis, of course
externally rakinis, are often said such as the original dakini, shinshoja, and the madatara.
All the females, females like enlightened beings, are identified as rakinis or dakinis.
But what means also generally is sanghas. Sanghas, as I said, extended sangha also means
source of inspirations. Sangha is known as the source of inspiration, source of the one
who helps and supports the growth of our enlightenment. And the dakinis are the display of loving
kindness and compassion. Compassion, they always support us into the part, into the
enlightened part. Therefore, dakinis are as known as then the sanghas. And also, there
are many different categories of the dakinis in the teaching set. Of course, there are
both Buddhas and two of them. But the dakinis can be as enlightened as the Vaidyavara, Yishinshoja,
and the Thara. But from their emanations, also emanated, there are so many kind of like
utterly connected enlightened dakinis. So they support and help in assuring to the us
in the part, in the teaching set. So therefore, dakinis are known as representing in that
way sangha members. Even though each of these guru, yadam, and then dakini represent all
those in the body of three of your rafugis, but when you highlight with each qualities,
qualities, then they are in that way understanding. The guru as Buddha, yadam as Dharma, and dak
inis
are as Sangha members. With this understanding, then we tell rafugis. That means again, rafugis
meaning of ultimate meaning of rafugis is making close connection. You in the devotee
love to feel closeness. That is the what the meaning of rafugis.